
# A1 Introduction to the Arm Architecture

This chapter introduces the ARM architecture. It contains the following sections:
- About the ARM architecture
- Architecture profiles
- Arm architectural concept
- Supported data types
- Floating-point support
- The Arm memory model

## A1.1 About the Arm architecture

The Arm architecture described in this Architecture Reference Manual defines the behavior of an abstract machine, referred to as a processing element, often abbreviated to PE. Implementations compliant with the Arm architecture must conform to the described behavior of the processing element. It is not intended to describe how to build an implementation of the PE, nor to limit the scope of such implementations beyond the defined behaviors.

Except where the architecture specifies differently, the programmer-visible behavior of an implementation that is compliant with the Arm architecture must be the same as a simple sequential execution of the program on the processing element. This programmer-visible behavior does not include the execution time of the program.

The Arm Architecture Reference Manual also describes rules for software to use the processing element.

The Arm architecture includes definitions of:
- An associated debug architecture.
- Associated trace architectures that define trace units that implementers can implement with the associated processor hardware. For more information, see:

The Arm architecture is a Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC) architecture with the following RISC architecture features:
- A large uniform register file.
- A load/store architecture, where data-processing operations only operate on register contents, not directly on memory contents.
- Simple addressing modes, with all load/store addresses determined from register contents and instruction fields only.

The architecture defines the interaction of the PE with memory, including caches, and includes a memory translation system. It also described how multiple PEs interact with each other and with other observers in a system.

This document defines the Armv8-A and Armv9-A architecture profiles.

The Arm architecture supports implementations across a wide range of performance points. Implementation size, performance, and very low power consumption are key attributes of the Arm architecture.

An important feature of the Arm architecture is backwards compatibility, combined with the freedom for optimal implementation ina wide range of standard and more specialized use cases. The Arm architecture supports:
- A 64-bit Execution state, AArch64.
- A 32-bit Execution state, AArch32, this is compatible with previous versions of the Arm architecture.

Features that are optional are explicitly defined as such in this Manual.

Both Execution states support floating-point instructions:
- AArch32 state provides:
    - SIMD instructions in the base instruction sets that operate on the 32-bit general-purpose registers.
    - Advanced SIMD instructions that operate on registers in the SIMD and floating-point register (SIMD&FP register) file.
    - Scalar floating-point instructions that operate on registers in the SIMD&FP register file.
- AArch64 state provides:
    - Advanced SIMD instructions that operate on registers in the SIMD&FP register file.
    - Scalar floating-point instructions that operate on registers in the SIMD&FP register file.
    - SVE instructions that operate on registers in the SVE register file.

The A64 instruction set does not include SIMD instructions that operate on the general-purpose registers.

# A1.2 Architecture profiles

The Arm architecture has evolved significantly since its introduction, and Arm continues to develop it. Nine major version of the architecture have been defined to data, denoted by the version numbers 1 to 9. Of these, the first three versions are now obsolete.

The generic means AArch64 and AArch32 describe the 64-bit and 32-bit Execution states:

AArch64 is the 64-bit Execution states, meaning addresses are held in 64-bit registers, and instructions in the base instruction set can use 64-bit registers for their processing. AArch64 state supports the A64 instruction set.

AArch32 is the 32-bit Execution states, meaning addresses are held in 32-bit registers, and instructions in the base instruction sets use 32-bit registers for their processing. AArch32 state supports the T32 and A32 instruction sets.

Arm defines three architecture profiles:

- Application profiles, described in this Manual:
    - Supports a Virtual Memory System Architecture (VMSA) based on a Memory Management Unit (MMU).
    - Supports the A64, A32, and T32 instruction sets.
- Real-time profile:
    - Supports a Protected Memory System Architecture (PMSA) based on a Memory Protection Unit (MPU).
    - Supports an optional VMSA based on an MMU.
    - Supports the A64, A32, and T32 instruction sets.
- Microcontroller profile:
    - Implements a programmers' model designed for low-latency interrupt processing, with hardware stacking of registers and support for writing interrupt handlers in high-level languages.
    - Implements a variant of the R-profile PMSA.
    - Supports a variant of the T32 instruction set.

## A1.3 Arm architectural concepts

### A1.3.1 Execution state

The execution state defines the PE execution environment, including
- The supported register widths.
- The supported instruction sets.
- Significant aspects of:
    - The Exception model.
    - The Virtual Memory System Architecture (VMSA).
    - The programmers' model.

The Execution states are:

AArch64. The 64-bit Execution state. This execution state:
- Provides 31 64-bit general-purpose registers, of which X30 is used as the procedure link register.
- Provides a 64-bit Program Counter (PC), stack pointers (SPs), and Exception Link Registers (ELRs).
- Provides 32 128-bit registers for Advanced SIMD vector and scalar floating-point support.
- Provides a single instruction set, A64.
- Defines the Armv8 Exception model, with up to four Exception levels, EL0-EL3, that provide an execution privilege hierarchy.
- Provides support for 64-bit virtual addressing.
- Defines a number of Process state (PSTATE) elements that hold PE state. The A64 instruction set includes instructions that operate directly on various PSTATE elements.
- Names each System register using a suffix that indicates the lowest Exception level at which the register can be accessed.

AArch32. The 32-bit Execution state. This Execution state:
- Provides 13 32-bit general-purpose registers, and a 32-bit PC, SP and Link Register (LR). The LR is used as both an ELR and a procedure link register. <u>Some of these registers have multiple banked instances for use in different PE modes</u>. <b>Junshi Wang：为啥需要在spec上定义这样一句话呢？</b>
- Provides a single ELR, for exception returns from Hyp mode.
- Provides 32 64-bit registers for Advanced SIMD vector and scalar floating-point support.
- Provides two instruction sets, A32 and T32.
- Supports the Armv7-A Exception mode, based on PE modes, and maps this onto the Armv8 Exception model, that is based on the Exception levels. <b>Junshi Wang：这两种方法的区别在哪儿呢？先看一下A8和A9的异常处理。</b>
- Provides support for 32-bit virtual addressing.
- Defines a number of Process state (PSTATE) elements that hold PE state. The A32 and T32 instruction sets include instructions that operate directly on various PSTATE elements, and instructions that access PSTATE by using Application Program Status Register (APSR) or the Current Program Status Register (CPSR).

### A1.3.2 The instruction sets

The possible instruction sets depend on the Execution state:

AArch64. AArch64 state supports only a single instruction set, called A64. This is a fixed-length instruction set that uses 32-bit instruction encodings.

AArch32. AArch32 state supports the following instruction sets:
- A32. This is a fixed-length instruction set that uses 32-bit instruction encodings.
- T32. This is a variable-length instruction set that uses both 16-bit and 32-bit instruction encodings.

In previous documents, these instruction sets were called the ARM and Thumb instruction sets. Armv8 and Armv9 extend each of these instruction sets. In AArch32 state, the Instruction set state determines the instruction set that the PE executes.

### A1.3.3 System registers

System registers provide control and status information of architected features.

The System registers use a standard naming format: <register_name>.<bit_field_name> to identify specific registers as wellas control and status bits within a register.

Bits can also be described by their numerical position in the form <register_name>[x:y] or the generic form bits[x:y].

In addition, in AArch64 state, most register names include the lowest Exception level that can access the register as a suffix to the register name:
- <register_name>_ELx, where x is 0, 1, 2, or 3.

The System registers comprise:
- The following registers that are described in this Manual:
    - General system control registers.
    - Debug registers.
    - Generic Timer registers.
    - Optionally, Performance Monitor registers.
    - Optionally, the Activity Monitors registers.
    - Optionally, the Scalable Vector Extension registers.
    - Optionally, in Armv9, Trace System registers.
- Optionally, one or more of the following groups of registers that are defined in other Arm architecture specifications:
    - Trace System registers
    - Generic Interrupt Controller (GIC) System registers
- RAS Extension System registers

#### The Arm Generic Interrupt Controller System registers

From version 3 of the Arm Generic Interrupt Controller architecture, GICv3, the GIC architecture specification defines a System register interface to some of its functionality.

### A1.3.4 Arm Debug

Armv8 and later architectures support the following:

- Self-hosted debug. In this model, the PE generates debug exceptions. Debug exceptions are part of the Armv8 Exception model.
- External debug. In this model, debug events cause the PE to enter Debug state. In Debug state, the PE is controlled by an external debugger.

All Armv8 and later implementations support both models. The model chosen by a particular user depends on the debug requirements during different stages of the design and development life cycle of the product. For example, external debug might be used during debugging of the hardware implementation and OS bring-up, and self-hosted debug might be used during application development.

## A1.4 Supported data types

The Arm architecture supports the following integer data types: Byte, Halfword, Word, Doubleword, Quadword.

The architecture also supports the following floating-point data types: Half-precision, Single-precision, Double-precision, BFloat16.

It also supports:
- Fixed-point interpretation of words and doublewords.
- Vectors, where a register holds multiple elements, each of the same data type.

The architecture provides the following register files:
- A general-purpose register file.
- A SIMD&FP register file.
- If FEAT_SVE is implemented, an SVE scalable vector register file.

In each of these, the possible register widths depend on the Execution state.

In AArch64 state:
- A general-purpose register file contains 64-bit registers:
    - Many instructions can access these registers as 64-bit registers or as 32-bit registers, using only the bottom 32 bits.
- A SIMD&FP register file contains 128-bit registers:
    - While the AArch64 vector registers support 128-bit vectors, the effective vector length can be 64-bits or 128-bits depending on the A64 instruction encoding used.
- An SVE scalable vector register file contains registers of an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED width:
    - An SVE scalable vector register has an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED width that is a multiple of 128 bits, up to a maximum of 2048 bits.
    - All SVE scalable vector registers in an implementation are the same width.
- An SVE predicate register file contains registers of an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED width:
    - An SVE predicate register has an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED width that is a multiple of 16 bits, up to a maximum of 256 bits.

In AArch32 state:
- A general-purpose register file contains 32-bit registers:
    - Two 32-bit registers can support a doubleword.
    - Vector formatting is supported.
- A SIMD&FP register file contains 64-bit registers:
    - AArch32 state does not support quadword integer or floating-point data types. Two consecutive 64-bit registers can used as a 128-bit register.

### A1.4.1 Advanced SIMD vector formats

In an implementation that includes the Advanced SIMD instructions that operate on the SIMD&FP register file, a register can hold one or more packed elements, all of the same size and type. In AArch32 state, the combination of a register and a data type describes a vector of elements, where the number of elements in the vector is implied by the size of the data type and the size of the register. In AArch64 state, the explicit combination of a register, number of elements, and element size describes a vector of elements. The vector is considered to be a one-dimensional array of elements of the data type specified in the instruction.

Vector indices are in the range 0 to (number of elements - 1). An index of 0 refers to the least significant bits of the vector.

#### Advanced SIMD vector formats in AArch64 state

In AArch64 state, the SIMD&FP registers can be referred to as Vn, where n is a value from 0 to 32.

The SIMD&FP registers support three data formats for loads, stores, and data-processing operations:
- A single, scalar, element in the least significant bits of the register.
- A 64-bit vector of byte, halfword, word, or doubleword elements.
- A 128-bit vector of byte, halfword, word, or doubleword elements.

The element size are defined with the vector format described as 
- For a 128-bit vector: Vn{.2D, .4S, .8H, .16B}
- For a 64-bit vector: Vn{.1D, .2S, .4H, .8B}

*Table A1-1 SIMD elements in AArch64 state*

*Figure A1-1 SIMD vectors in AArch64 state*

#### Advanced SIMD vector formats in AArch32 state

*Table A1-2 SIMD data types in AArch32 state*

The .F16 data type is the half-precision data type selected by the FPSCR.AHP bit.

The .F32 data type is the Arm standard single-precision float-point data type.

The instruction definitions use a data type specifier to define the data types appropriate to the operation.

*Figure A1-2 Advanced SIMD data type hierarchy in AArch32 state*

For example, a multiply instruction must distinguish between integer and floating-point data types.

An integer multiply instruction that generates a double-width (long) result must specify the input data types as signed or unsigned. However, some integer multiply instructions use modulo arithmetic, and therefore do not have to distinguish between signed and unsigned inputs.

*Figure A1-3 Advanced SIMD vectors in AArch32 state*

The AArch32 general-purpose registers support vectors formats for use by the SIMD instructions in the Base instruction set.

*Figure A1-4 Vector formatting in AArch32 state*

### A1.4.2 SVE vector format

In an implementation that includes the AArch64 SVE instructions, an SVE register can hold one or more packed or unpacked elements, all of the same size and type. The combination of a register and an element size describes a vector of elements. The vector is considered to be a one-dimensional array of elements of the data type specified in the instruction. The number of elements in the vector is implied by the size of the data elements and the Effective SVE vector length of the register.

Vector indexes are in the range 0 to (number of elements - 1). An index of 0 refers to the least significant bits of the vector.

#### Scalable vector format in AArch64 state

In AArch64 state, the SVE registers can be referred to as Zn, where n is a value from 0 to 31.

The element sizes are defined with the vector format described as: Zn{.Q, .D, .S, .H, .B}.

*Table A1-3 SVE elements in AArch64 state*

#### SVE configurable vector length

Privileged Exception levels can use the ZCR_Elx.LEN System register fields to constrain the vector length at the Exception levels.

An implementation allows the vector length to be constrained to any power of two that is less than the maximum implemented vector length.

An implementation is permitted to allow the vector length to be constrained to multiples of 128 that are not a power of two. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED which of the permitted multiples of 128 are supported. 

**Junshi Wang：向量长度是2的幂次或者128的倍数。**

When the values in ZCR_ELx.LEN configure an unsupported vector length, the implementation is required to select the largest supported vector length that is less than the configured vector length. This does not alter the values in ZCR_ELx.Len.

If executing at an Exception level that is constrained to use a vector length that is less than the maximum implemented vector length, the bits beyond the constrained length of vector registers, predicate registers, or FFR are inaccessible.

If floating-point instructions are disabled, trapped, or not available at all Exception levels below the target Exception level, for the current Security state, the accessible SVE register state at the target Exception level is preserved.

If any of the following are true and floating-point instructions are not trapped at ELx, then for all purposes other than a direct read, the ZCR_ELx.LEN field has an Effective value of 0, which implies an SVE vector length of 128 bits.
- SVE instructions are disabled at ELx.
- SVE instructions are trapped at ELx.
- SVE instructions are not available because ELx is in AArch32 state.

**Junshi Wang：SVE和异常的关系是什么呢。**

When taking an exception from an Exception level that is more constrained to a target Exception level that is less constrained, the previously inaccessible bits that become accessible have one of the following:
- A value of zero.
- The value that they had before executing at the more constrained vector length.

The choice between these options is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED and can vary dynamically.

When the SVE vector length is increased by writing a larger value of ZCR_ELx.LEN, the previously inaccessible bits that become accessible have one of the following:
- A value of zero.
- The value that they had before executing at the more constrained vector size.

The choice between these options is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED and can vary dynamically.

### A1.4.3 Half-precision floating-point formats

The Arm architecture supports two half-precision floating-point formats:
- IEEE half-precision, as described in the IEEE 754-2008 standard.
- Arm alternative half-precision format.

Both formats can be used for conversions to and from other floating-point formats. FPCR.AHP controls the format in AArch64 state and FPSCR.AHP controls the format in AArh32 state. FEAT_FP16 adds half-precision data processing instructions, which always use the IEEE format. These instructions ignore the value of the relevant AHP field, and behave as if it has an Effective value of 0. The FEAT_SVE half-precision data-processing instructions ignore the value of FPCR.AHP, and behave as if it have an Effective value of 0.

The description of IEEE half-precision includes Arm-specific details that are left open by the standard, and is only an introduction to the formats and to the values they can contain. 

For both half-precision floating-point format, the layout of the 16-bit format is the same.

The interpretation of the format depends on the value of the exponent field, bits [14:10] and on which half-precision format is bing used.
- 0 < exponent < 0x1F. The value is a normalized number.
- exponent == 0. The value is either a zero or a denormalized number, depending on the fraction bits. Half-precision denormalized numbers are not flushed to zero by default. When FEAT_FP16 is implemented, the FPCR.FZ16 bit controls whether flushing denormalized numbers to zero is enabled for half-precision data-processing instruction.
- exponent == 0x1F. The value depends on which half-precision format is being used:
    - IEEE half-precision. The value is either an infinity or a Not a Number (NaN), depending on the fractions bits.
    - Alternative half-precision. The value is a normalized number.

### A1.4.4 Single-precision floating-point format

The single-precision floating-point format is as defined by the IEEE 754 standard.

This description includes Arm-specific details that are left option by the standard. It is only intended as an introduction to the formats and to the values they can contain. 

A single-precision value is a 32-bit word with the format.

THe interpretation of the format depends on the value of the exponent field, bits[30:23]:
- 0 < exponent < 0x1F. The value is a normalized number.
- exponent == 0. The value is either a zero or a denormalized number, depending on the fraction bits. Denormalized numbers are always flushed to zero in Advanced SIMD processing in AArch32 state. They are optionally flushed to zero in floating-point processing and in Advanced SIMD processing in AArch64 state.
- exponent == 0xFF. The value is either an infinity or a Not a Number (NaN), depending on the fraction bits.

### A1.4.5 Double-precision floating-point format

The double-precision floating-point format is as defined by the IEEE 754 standard. Double-precision floating-point in supported by both SIMD and floating-point instructions in AArch64 state, and only by floating-point instructions in AArch32 state.

This description includes implementation-specific details that are left open by the standard. It is only intended as an introduction to the formats and to the values they can contain. 

A double-precision value is a 64-bit doubleword with the format.

Double-precision values represent numbers, infinities, and NaNs in a similar way to single-precision values.

### A1.4.6 BFloat16 floating-point format

BFloat16, or BF16 is a 16-bit floating-point storage format. The BF16 format inherits many of its properties and behaviors from the single-precision formal defined by the IEEE 754 standard.

For the BFloat16 floating-point format, the layout is

- 0 < exponent < 0xFF. The value is a normalized number.
- exponent == 0. The value is either a zero or a denormalized number, depending on the fraction bits. Denormalized numbers are always flushed to zero in Advanced SIMD processing in AArch32 state. They are optionally flushed to zero in floating-point processing and in Advanced SIMD processing in AArch64 state.
- exponent == 0xFF. The value is either an infinity or a Not a Number (NaN), depending on the fraction bits. In the arithmetic instructions that accept BF16 inputs, there is no distinction between quiet and signaling input NaNs, since these instructions cannot signal a floating-point exception, and any type of input NaN generates the same Default NaN result.

BF16 values are 16-bit halfwords that software can convert to single-precision format, by appending 16 zero bits, so that single-precision arithmetic instructions can be used. A single-precision value can be converted to BF16 format if requited, either by:
- Truncating, by removing the least significant 16 bits.
- Using the BFlat16 conversion instructions.

### A1.4.7 Fixed-point format

Fixed-point formats are used only for conversions between floating-point and fixed-point values. They apply to general-purpose registers.

Fixed-point values can be signed or unsigned, and can be 16-bit or 32-bit. Conversion instructions take an argument that specifies the number of fraction bits in the fixed-point number. That is, it specifies the position of the binary point.

### A1.4.8 Conversion between floating-point and fixed-point values

The Arm architecture supports the conversion of a scalar floating-point to or from a signed or unsigned fixed-point value in a general-purpose register.

The instruction argument #fbits indicates that the general-purpose register holds a fixed-point number with fbits bits after the binary point, where fbits is in the range 1 to 64 for a 64-bit general-purpose register, or 1 to 32 for a 32-bit general-purpose register.

More specifically:
- For a 64-bit register Xd: The integer part is Xd[63:#fbits]. The fractional part is Xd[(#fbits-1):0].
- For a 32-bit register Wd or Rd: The integer part is Wd[31:#fbits] or Rd[31:#fbits]. The fractional part is Wd[(#fibts-1):0] or Rd[(#fbits-1):0].

These instructions can cause the following floating-point exceptions:
- Invalid operation when the floating-point input is NaN or Infinity or when a numerical value cannot be represented within the destination register.
- Inexact when the numeric result differs from the input value.
- Input denormal when flushing denormalized numbers to zero is enabled and the denormal input is replace by a zero.

### A1.4.9 Polynomial arithmetic over {0,1}

Some SIMD instructions that operate on SIMD&FP registers can operate on polynomials over {0,1}. The polynomial dat type represents a polynomial in x of the form $b_{n-1}x^{n-1}+...+b_1x+b_0$ where $b_k$ is bit[k] of the value.

The coefficients 0 and 1 are manipulated using the rules of Boolean arithmetic:
- 0 + 0 = 1 + 1 = 0
- 0 + 1 = 1 + 0 = 1
- 0 x 0 = 0 x 1 = 1 x 0 = 0
- 1 x 1 = 1

That is:
- Adding two polynomials over {0,1} is the same as a bitwise exclusive OR.
- Multiplying two polynomials over {0,1} is the same as integer multiplication except that partial products are exclusive-ORed instead of being added.

A64, A32, and T32 provide instructions for performing polynomial multiplication of 8-bit values.

**Junshi Wang：用于加密计算**

#### Pseudocode description of polynomial multiplication

In pseudocode, polynomial addition is described by the EOR operation on bitstrings.

## A1.5 Floating-point support

The architecture includes the following types of floating-point instructions
- Scalar floating-point instructions that operate on the lowest numbered element of the SIMD&FP registers.
- Advanced SIMD floating-point instructions that operate on multiple elements of the SIMD&FP registers.
- IF FEAT_SVE is implemented, AArch64 SVE instructions that operate on multiple elements of the scalable vector registers, in which the SIMD&FP registers occupy the least significant 128 bits.

The architecture can support the following levels of support for Advanced SIMD and floating-point instructions:
- Full Advanced SIMD and floating-point support without floating-point exception trapping.
- Full Advanced SIMD and floating-point support with floating-point exception trapping.
- No Advanced SIMD or floating-point support. This option is licensed only for implementations targeting specialized markets.

All Armv8-A systems that support standard operating systems with rich application environments provide hardware support for Advanced SIMD and floating-point instructions. All Armv9-A systems that support standard operating systems with rich application environments also provide hardware support for SVE2 instructions.

The Arm architecture supports single-precision (32-bit) and double-precision (64-bit) floating-point data types and arithmetic as defined by IEEE 754 floating-point standard. It also supports the half-precision (16-bit) floating-point data type for data storage, by supporting conversions between single-precision and half-precision data types and double-precision and half-precision data types. When FEAT_FP16 is implemented, it also supports the half-precision floating-point data type for data-processing operations.

The SIMD instructions provided packed Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) and single-element scalar operations, and support:
- Single-precision and double precision arithmetic in AArch64 state.
- Single-precision arithmetic only in AArch32 state.
- When FEAT_FP16 is implemented, half-precision arithmetic is supported in AArch64 and AArch32 states.

Floating-point support in AArch64 state SIMD is IEEE 754-2008 compliant with:
- Configurable rounding modes.
- Configurable Default NaN behavior.
- Configurable flush to zero of denormalized numbers.

Floating-point computation using AArch32 Advanced SIMD instructions remains unchanged from Armv7. A32 and T32 Advanced SIMD floating-point always uses Arm standard float-point arithmetic and performs IEEE 754 floating-point arithmetic with the following restrictions:
- Denormalized numbers are flushed to zero.
- Only default NaNs are supported.
- The Round to Nearest rounding mode is used.
- Untrapped floating-point exception handing is used for all floating-point exception.

If floating-point exception trapping is supported, floating-point exceptions, such as Overflow or Divide by Zero, can be handled without trapping. This applies to both SIMD and floating-point operations. When handled in this way, a floating-point exception causes a cumulative status register bit to be set to 1 and a default result to be produced by operation.

In AArch64 state, the following registers control floating-point operation and return floating-point status information:
- The Floating-Point Control Register, FPCR, controls:
    - The half-precision format when applicable, FPCR.AHP bit.
    - Default NaN behavior, FPCR.DN bit.
    - Flushing of denormalized numbers to zero, FPCR.{FZ, FZ16} bits. If FEAT_FP16 is not implemented, FPCR.FZ16 is RES0.
    - Rounding mode support, FPCR.Rmode field.
    - Len and Stride fields associated with execution in AArch32 state, and only supported for a context save and restore from AArch64 state. These fields are obsolete in Armv8 and can be implemented as RAZ/WI. If they are implemented as RW and are programmed to a nonzero value, they make some AArch32 floating-point instruction UNDEFINED.
- The Floating-Point Status Register, FPSR, provides:
    - Cumulative floating-point exceptions flags, FPSR.{IDC, IXC, UFC, OFC, DZC, IOC and QC}.
    - The AArch32 floating-point comparison flags {N, Z, C, V}. These bits are RES0 if AArch32 floating-point is not implemented.

In AArch64 state, the process state flags, PSTATE.{N, Z, C, V} are used for all data-processing compares and any associated condition execution.

If FEAT_FlagM2 is implemented, the instructions AXFLAG and XAFLAG convert between the Arm condition flag format and an alternative format.

AArch32 state provides a single Floating-Point Status and Control Register, FPSCR, combining the FPCR and FPSR fields.

### A1.5.1 Instruction support

The floating-point instructions support:
- Load and store for single elements and vectors of multiple elements.
- Data processing on single and multiple elements for both integer and floating-point data types.
- When FEAT_FCMA is implemented, complex number arithmetic.
- Floating-point conversion between different levels of precision.
- Conversion between floating-point, fixed-point integer, and integer data types.
- Floating-point rounding.

### A1.5.2 Floating-point standards, and terminology

*Table A1-4 Floating-point terminology*

### A1.5.3 Arm standard floating-point input and output values

The Arm architecture provides full IEEE 754 floating-point arithmetic support. In AArch32 state, floating-point operations performed using Advanced SIMD instructions are limited to Arm standard floating-point operation, regardless of the selected rounding mode in the FPSCR. Unlike AArch32, AArch64 SIMD floating point arithmetic is performed using the rounding mode selected by the FPCR.

Arm standard floating-point arithmetic supports the following input formats defined by the IEEE 754 floating-point standard:
- Zeros
- Normalized numbers.
- Denormalized numbers are flushed to 0 before floating-point operations
- NaNs
- Infinities.

Arm standard floating-point arithmetic supports the Round to Nearest (roundTiesToEven) rounding mode defined by IEEE 754 standard.

Arm standard floating-point arithmetic supports the following output result formats defined by the IEEE 754 standard:
- Zeros
- Normalized numbers.
- Results that are less than the minimum normalized number are flushed to zero.
- NaNs produced in floating-point operations are always the default NaN.
- Infinities.

### A1.5.4 Flushing denormalized numbers to zero

For this section if FEAT_AFP is not implemented, the behavior is the same as if FPCR.AH == 0, FPCR.FZ == 0 and FPCR.NEP == 0.

Calculations involving denormalized numbers and Underflow exceptions can reduce the performance of floating-point processing. For many algorithms, replacing the denormalized operands and intermediate results with zeros can recover this performance, without significantly affecting the accuracy of the final result. Arm floating-point implementations allow denormalized numbers to be flushed to zero to permit this optimization.

If a number value satisfies the condition  0 < Abs(value) < MinNorm, it is treated as a denormalized number.

Flushing denormals to zero is incompatible with the IEEE 754 standard, and must not be used when IEEE 754 compatibility is a requirement. Enabling flushing of denormals to zero must be done with care. Although it can improve performance on some algorithms, there are significant limitations on its use. These are application-dependent:
- On many algorithms, it have no noticeable effect, because the algorithm does not usually process denormalized numbers.
- On other algorithms, it can cause exceptions to occur and can seriously reduce the accuracy of the results of the algorithm.

#### Flushing denormalized inputs to zero

If flushing denormalized inputs to zero is enabled for an instruction and a data type, and an input to that instruction is a denormalized number of that data type, the input operand is flushed to zero, and its sign bit is not changed.

If floating-point operation has an input denormalized number that is flushed to zero, for all purposes within the instruction other than calculating Input Denormal floating-point exceptions, all inputs that are denormalized numbers are treated as through they were zero with the same sign as the input.

For floating-point instructions, if the instruction process half-precision inputs, flushing denormalized inputs to zero can be controlled as follows:
- If FPCR.FZ16 == 0, denormalized half-precision inputs are not flushed to zero.
- If FPCR.FZ16 == 1, for half-precision data-processing instructions, flushing of input denormalized numbers to zero occurs as follows:
    - If an instruction does not convert a half-precision input to a higher precision output, all input denormalized numbers are flushed to zero.
    - If an instruction converts a half-precision input to a higher precision oyutput, input denormalized numbers are not flushed to zero.

If FPCR.FIZ==1, or both FPCR.AH==0 and FPCR.FZ==1, for Advanced SIMD and floating-point instructions other than FABS and FNEG, all signed-precision, double-precision and BF16 input operands that are denormalized numbers are flushed to zero. Half-precision input operands are not flushed to zero.

If FPCR.FZ==0, for Advanced SIMD, floating-point and BF16 instructions, for single-precision, double-precision and BF16 inputs, the FPCR.FZ setting does not cause denormalized inputs to be flushed to zero, although other factors might cause denormalized numbers to be flushed to zero.

If FPCR.AH==1, regardless of the value of FPCR.FIZ, all of the following instructions flush all input denormal numbers to zero:
- BFloat instructions: BFCVT, BFCVTN, BFCVTN2, BFMLALB, BFMLALT, BFMLALB, BFMLALT, and BFCVTVT.
- Single-precision and double-precision instructions: FRECPE, FRECPS, FRECPX, FRSQRTE, and FPSQRTS.

#### Flushing to zero of denormalized numbers as intermediate results of some BF16 instructions

### A1.5.7 Floating-point exceptions and exception traps

## A1.6 The Arm memory model

The Arm memory model supports:
- Generating an exception on an unaligned memory access.
- Restricting access by applications to specified areas of memory.
- Translating virtual addresses (VAs) provided by executing instructions to physical addresses (PAs).
- Altering the interpretation of multi-byte data between big-endian and little-endian.
- Controlling the order of accesses to memory.
- Controlling caches and address translation structures.
- Synchronizing access to shard memory by multiple PEs.
- Barriers that control and prevent speculative access to memory.

VA support depends on the Execution states, as follows:

AArch64 state supports 64-bit virtual addressing, with the Translation Control Register determining the supported VA range. Execution at EL1 and EL0 supports two independent VA ranges, each with its own translation controls.

AArch32 state supports 32-bit virtual addressing, with the Translating Control Register determining the supported VA range. For execution at EL1 and EL0, system software can split the VA range into two subranges, each with its own translation controls.

The supported PA space is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, and can be discovered by system software.

Regardless of the Execution state, the Virtual Memory System Architecture (VMSA) can translate VAs to blocks or pages of memory anywhere within the supported PA space.