# Chapter B1 The AArch64 Application Level Programmers' Model

## B1.1 About the Application level programmers' model

$\triangle$ The information in this chapter is distinct from the system information required to service and support application execution under an operating system, or higher level of system software. However, some knowledge of the system information is need to put the Application level programmers' model into context.

$\triangle$ Depending on the implementation choices, the architecture supports multiple levels of executing privilege, indicated by different *Exception levels* that number upwards from EL0 to EL3. EL0 corresponds to the lowest privilege level and is often described as unprivileged. The Application level programmers' model is the programmers model for software executing at EL0.

$\triangle$ System software determines the Exception level, and there fore the level of privilege, at which software runs. When an operating system supports execution at both EL1 and EL0, an application usually runs unprivileged at EL0. This:
- Permits the operating system to allocate system resources to an application in a unique or shared manner.
- Provides a degree of protection from other processes, and so helps protect the operating system from malfunctioning software.

$\triangle$ Execution at any Exception level above EL0 is often referred to as privileged execution.

## B1.2 Registers in AArch64 Execution State

### B1.2.1 AArch64架构状态寄存器

$\triangle$ **R0-R30**. 31 general-purpose registers, R0 to R30. Each register can be accessed as:
- A 64-bit general-purpose register named X0 to X30.
- A 32-bit general-purpose register named W0 to W30.

###### Figure B1-1 General-purpose register naming

$\triangle$ The X30 general-purpose register is used as the procedure call ink register.

$\triangle$ In instruction encodings, the value `0b11111`(31) is used to indicate the ZR (zero register). This indicates that the argument takes the value zero, but does not indicate that the ZR is implemented as a physical register.

$\triangle$ **SP**. A 64-bit dedicated Stack Pointer register. The least significant 32 bits of stack pointer can be accessed using the register name WSP.

$\triangle$ The use of SP as an operand in an instruction, indicates the use of the current stack pointer.

$\triangle$ Stack pointer alignment to a 16-byte boundary is configurable at EL1.

$\triangle$ **PC**. A 64-bit Program Counter holding the address of the current instruction.

$\triangle$ Software cannot write directly to the PC. It can be updated only on a branch, exception entry or exception return.

$\triangle$ Attempting to execute an A64 instruction that is not word-aligned generates a PC alignment fault.

$\triangle$ **V0-V31**. 32 SIMD&FP registers, V0 to V31. Each register can be accessed as:
- A 128-bit register named Q0 to Q31.
- A 64-bit register named D0 to D31.
- A 32-bit register named S0 to S31.
- A 16-bit register named H0 to H31.
- An 8-bit register named B0 to B31.
- A 128-bit vector of elements.
- A 64-bit vector of elements.

$\triangle$ Where the number of bits described by a register name does not occupy an entire SIMD&FP register, it refers to the least significant bits.

###### Figure B1-2 SIMD and floating-point register naming

$\triangle$ **FPCR, FPSR**. Two SIMD and floating-point control and status register, FPCR and FPSR.

$\triangle$ **Z0-Z31**. 32 scalable vector registers, Z0 to Z31. Each register can be accesses as:
- A vector of elements with an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED maximum length of 128 to 2048 bits.
- A fixed-length 128-bit vector of elements named V0 to V31.
- A 128-bit register named O0 to O31.
- A 64-bit register named D0 to D31.
- A 32-bit register named S0 to S31.
- A 16-bit register named H0 to H31.
- An 8-bit register named B0 to B31.

###### Figure B1-3 SVE register naming

$\triangle$ **P0-P15**. 16 SVE scalable predicate registers, P0 to P15.

$\triangle$ **FFR**. The dedicated SVE First Fault Register that has the same size and format as the predicate registers, P0-P15.

#### Pseudocode description of registers in AArch64 state

$\triangle$ In the pseudocode functions that access registers:
- The assignment form is used for register writes.
- The non-assignment for register reads.

$\triangle$ The use of the `X[]` function are:
- Reading or writing X0-X30, using `n` to index the required register.
- Reading the zero register ZR, accessed as `X[31]`.

$\triangle$ The pseudocode use of X[31] to represent the zero register does not indicate that hardware must implement this register.

$\triangle$ The AArch64 `SP[]` function is used to read or write the current SP.

$\triangle$ The AArch64 `PC[]` function is used to read the PC.

$\triangle$ The AArch64 `V[]` function is used to read or write the Advanced SIMD and floating-point registers V0-V31, using a parameter `n` to index the required register.

$\triangle$ The AArch64 `Vpart[]` function is used to read or write a part of one of V0-V31, using a parameter `n` to index the required register, and a parameter `part` to indicate the required part of the register, see the function description for more information.

$\triangle$ The AArch64 `Z[]` function is used to read or write the SVE scalable vector register Z0-Z31, using a parameter `n` to index the required register.

$\triangle$ The `Z[]`, `V[]` and `Vpart[]` functions access the same underlying vector register file.

### B1.2.2 SVE vector registers

$\triangle$ SVE has 32 scalable vector registers named Z0-Z31.

$\triangle$ All SVE scalable vector registers are the same size.

$\triangle$ The size of an SVE scalable vector register is an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED multiple of 128 bits.

$\triangle$ The maximum size of an SVE scalable vector register is 2048 bits.

$\triangle$ The minimum size of an SVE scalable vector register is 128 bits.

$\triangle$ Unless stated otherwise in an instruction description, SVE instructions treat an SVE scalable vector register as containing one ore more vector elements that are equal in size.

$\triangle$ Unless stated otherwise in an instruction description, vector elements can be processed in parallel by SVE instruction.

$\triangle$ When an SVE scalable vector register is divided into vector elements by an instruction, the size of the vector elements is encoded in the opcode of the instruction. The size of the vector elements is 8, 16, 32, 64 or 128 bits.

$\triangle$ When the order of operations performed by an SVE instruction on vector or predicate elements has observable significance, elements are processed in increasing element number order.

$\triangle$ The layouts of an SVE 256-bit vector register and a SIMD&FP vector in AArch64 state are:

###### Figure B1-4 SVE vectors in AArch64 state

$\triangle$ Bits[127:0] of each of the SVE scalable vector registers, Z0-Z31, hold the correspondingly numbered AArch64 SIMD&FP register, V0-V31.

$\triangle$ When the accessible SVE vector length at the current Exception level is greater than 128 bits, any AArch64 instruction that writes to V0-V31 sets all the accessible bits above bit [127] of the corresponding SVE scalable vector register to zero.

#### SVE writes to scalar registers

$\triangle$ Certain SVE instructions generate a scalar result that is written to an AArch64 general-purpose register or to element[0] of a vector register.

$\triangle$ When an SVE instruction generates a scalar result of width N bits, the instruction places the result in bits [N-1:0] of the destination registers.

$\triangle$ When an instruction generates a scalar result of width N bits, the N is less than the maximum accessible destination register width RW, the instruction sets bits [RW-1:N] of the destination register to zero.

### B1.2.3 SVE predicate registers

$\triangle$ SVE has 16 scalable predicate registers named P0-P15.

$\triangle$ Each SVE predicate register holds one bit for each byte of a vector register.

$\triangle$ The size of an SVE predicate register is an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED multiple of 16 bits.

$\triangle$ The maximum size of an SVE predicate register is 256 bits.

$\triangle$ The minimum size of an SVE predicate register is 16 bits.

$\triangle$ Unless stated otherwise in the instruction description, SVE instructions treat an SVE predicate register as containing one or more predicate elements of equal size.

$\triangle$ Each predicate register can be subdivided into a number of 1-bit, 2-bit, 4-bit, or 8-bit elements.

$\triangle$ Each predicate element in a predicate register corresponds to a vector element.

$\triangle$ When a predicate register is divided into predicate elements by an instruction, the size of the predicate elements is encoded in the opcode of the instruction.

$\triangle$ If the lowest-numbered bit of a predicate element is 1, the value of the predicate element is TRUE.

$\triangle$ If the lowest-numbered bit of a predicate element is 0, the value of the predicate element is FALSE.

$\triangle$ For all SVE instructions, if any of the following are true, all bits except the lowest-numbered bit of each predicate element are ignored on reads:
- The instructions are not used to move and permute predicate elements.
- The instructions are not predicate logical operations.

$\triangle$ For all SVE instructions, if all of the following are true, all bits except the lowest-numbered bit of each predicate element are set to zero on writes:
- The instructions are not used to move and permute predicate elements.
- The instructions are not predicate logical operation.

### B1.2.4 FFR, First Fault Register

$\triangle$ SVE has a dedicated First Fault Register named FFR.

$\triangle$ The FFR captures the cumulative fault status of a sequence of SVE First-fault and Non-fault vector load instructions.

$\triangle$ The FFR and the predicate registers have the same size and format.

$\triangle$ The FFR is a Special-purpose register.

$\triangle$ All bits in the FFR that are accessible at current Exception level are initialized to 1 by using the `SETFFR` instruction.

$\triangle$ Bits in the FFR are indirectly set to 0 as a result of a suppressed access or fault generated in response to an *Active element* of an SVE First-fault or Non-fault vector load.

$\triangle$ Bits in the FRR are never set to 1 as a result of a vector load instruction.

$\triangle$ After a sequence of one or more SVE First-load or Non-fault loads that follow a `SETFFR` instruction, the FFR contains a sequence of zero or more TRUE elements, followed by zero or more FALSE elements.

$\triangle$ The TRUE elements in the FFR indicate the shortest sequence of consecutive elements that could contain valid data loaded from memory.

$\triangle$ The only instructions that directly read the FFR are: `RDFFR` (predicated); `RDFFRS`.

$\triangle$ The only instructions that directly write the FFR are: `WRFFR`;  `SETFFR`.

$\triangle$  All direct and indirect reads and writes to the FFR occur in program order relative to other instructions, without explicit synchronization.

### B1.2.5 Process state, PSTATE

$\triangle$ Process state or PSTATE is an abstraction of process state information. All of the instruction sets provide instructions that operate on element on elements of PSTATE.

$\triangle$ **The Condition flags**. Flag-setting instruction set these. They are:
- **N**. Negative Condition flag. If the result of the instruction is regarded as a two's complement signed integer, the PE set this to 1 if the result is negative.
- **Z**. Zero Condition flag. Set to 1 if the result of the instruction is zero.
  
  A result of zero often indicates an equal from a comparison.
- **C**. Carry Condition flag. Set to 1 if the instruction results in a carry condition, for example an unsigned overflow that is the result of an addition.
- **V**. Overflow Conditional flags. Set to 1 if the instruction results in an overflow condition, for example a signed overflow that is the result of an addition.

$\triangle$ Conditional instruction test the N, Z, C and V conditional flags, combining them with the Conditional code for the instruction to determine whether the instruction must be executed. In this way, execution of the instruction is conditional on the result of a previous operation.

$\triangle$ **The exception masking bits**
- **D**. Debug exception mask bit. When EL0 is enabled to modify the mask bits, this bit is visible and can be modified. However, this bit is architecturally ignored at EL0.
- **A**. SError interrupt mask bit.
- **I**. IRQ interrupt mask bit.
- **F**. FIQ interrupt mask bit.

For each bit, the values are:

- **0**. Exception not masked.
- **1**. Exception masked.

$\triangle$ Access at EL0 using AArch64 state depends on SCTLR_EL1.UMA.

#### Accessing PSTATE fields at EL0

$\triangle$ At EL0 using AArch64 state, PSTATE fields can be accessed using Special-purpose registers that can be directly read using the MRS instruction and directly written using MSR (register) instruction. 

###### Table B1-1 Accessing PSTATE fields at EL0 using MRS and MSR (register)

$\triangle$ Software can also use the MSR (immediate) instruction to directly write to PSTATE.{D,A,I,F}.

###### Table B1-2 Accessing PSTATE.{D, A, I, F} at EL0 using MSR (immediate)

$\triangle$ However, access to the PSTATE.{D,A,I,F} fields at EL0 using AArch64 state depends on SCTLR_EL1.UMA.

$\triangle$ Writes to the PSTATE fields have side-effects on various aspects of the PE operation. All of these side-effects, are guaranteed:
- Not to be visible to earlier instructions in the execution stream.
- To be visible to later instructions in the execution stream.

#### SVE use of PSTATE N, Z, C, and V Condition flags

$\triangle$ PSTATE N,Z,C, and V condition flags can be updated by any of the following:
- An SVE instruction that generates a predicate result and updates the PSTATE N,Z,C and V Condition flags based on the value of the result.
- An SVE instruction that updates the PSTATE N,Z,C and V Conditional flags based ont eh value in its predicate source register or FFR: `PTEST`; `RDFFR` (predicated)
- An SVE instruction that updates the PSTATE N,Z,C and V Conditional flags based on the values in its general-purpose source registers: `CTERMEQ`;  `CTERME`.

$\triangle$ When setting the PSTATE N,Z,C and V Conditional flags for SVE predicated flag-setting instructions, the instruction's *Governing predicate* determines which predicate elements are considered Active.

$\triangle$ When setting the PSTATE N,Z,C and V Conditional flags for SVE unpredicated flag-setting instructions, all predicate elements are considered Active.

$\triangle$ Unless otherwise specified in an instruction description, the SVE flag-setting instructions update the PSTATE N,Z,C, and V Condition flags as follows:

- N; First; Set to 1 if the First active element was TRUE, otherwise cleared to 0.
- Z; None; Cleared to 0 if any Active element was TRUE, otherwise set to 1.
- C; Not last; Cleared to 0 if the Last active element was TRUE, otherwise set to 1.
- V; Cleared to 0.

### B1.2.6 System registers

$\triangle$ System registers provide support for execution control, status and general system configuration. The majority of the System registers are not accessible at EL0.

$\triangle$ However, some System registers can be configured to allow access from software executing at EL0. Any access from EL0 to a System register with the access right disabled causes the instruction to behave as UNDEFINED.

$\triangle$ **Cache ID registers**. The CTR_EL0 and DCZID_EL0 registers provide implementation parameters for EL0 cache management support.

$\triangle$ **Debug registers**. A Debug Communication channel is supported by the MDCCSR_EL0, DBGDTR_EL0, DBGDTRRX_EL0 and DBGDTRTX_EL0 registers.

$\triangle$ **Performance Monitors registers**. The Performance Monitors Extension provides counters and configuration registers. Software executing at EL1 or a higher Exception level can configure some of these registers to be accessible at EL0.

$\triangle$ **Active Monitor registers**. The Activity Monitor Extension provides counters and configuration registers. Software executing at EL1 or a hither Exception level can configure these registers to be accessible at EL0.

$\triangle$ **Thread ID registers**. The TPIDR_EL0 and TRIDRRO_EL0 registers are two thread ID registers with different access rights.

$\triangle$ **Timer registers**. The following operations are performed by these registers.
- Read access to the system counter clock frequency using CNTFRQ_EL0.
- Physical and virtual timer count registers, CNTPCT_EL0 and CNTVCT_EL0.
- Physical up-count comparison, down-count value and timer control registers, CNTP_CVAL_EL0, CNTP_TVAL_EL0, and CNTP_CTL_EL0.
- Virtual up-count comparison, down-count value and timer control registers,CNTV_CVAL_EL0, CNTV_TVAL_EL0, and CNTV_CTL_EL0.

## B1.3 Software control features and EL0

### B1.3.1 异常处理

$\triangle$ In the Arm architecture, an *exception* causes a change of program flow. Execution of an exception handler starts, at an Exception level higher than EL0, from a defined vector that relates to the exception taken.

$\triangle$ Exception includes:
- Interrupts。
- Memory system aborts.
- Exceptions generated by attempting to execute an instruction that is UNDEFINED.
- System calls
- secure monitor or Hypervisor traps.
- Debug exceptions.

$\triangle$ Most details of exception handling are not visible to application level software.

$\triangle$ The `SVC` instruction causes a Supervisor Call exception. This provides a mechanism for unprivileged software to make a system call to an operating system.

$\triangle$ The `BRK` instruction generates a Breakpoint Instruction exception, This provides a mechanism for debug software using debugger executing on the same PE.

$\triangle$ The `BRK` instruction is supported only in the A64 instruction set. The equivalent instruction in the T32 and A32 instruction set is `BKPT`.

### B1.3.2 Wait for Interrupt and Wait for Event

$\triangle$ Issuing a `WFI` instruction indicates that no further execution is required until a WFI wake-up event occurs. This permits entry to a low-power state.

$\triangle$ Issuing a `WFE` instruction indicates that no further execution is required until a WFE wake-up event occurs. This permits entry to a low-power state.

### B1.3.3 The YIELD instruction

$\triangle$ The `YIELD` instruction provides a hint that the task performed by a thread is of low importance so that it could yield. This mechanism can be used to improve overall performance in a *Symmetric Multithreading* (SMT) or *Symmetric Multiprocessing* (SMP) system.

$\triangle$ Examples of when the `YIELD` instruction might be used include a thread that is sitting in a spin-lock, or where the arbitration priority of the snoop bit in an SMP system is modified. The `YIELD` instruction permits binary compatibility between SMT and SMP systems.

$\triangle$ The `YIELD` instruction is a `NOP` hint instruction.

$\triangle$ The `YIELD` instruction has no effect in a single-threaded system, but developers of such systems can use the instruction to flag its intended use for future migration to a multiprocessor or multithreading system. Operating systems can use `YIELD` in places where a yield hint is wanted, knowing that it will be treated as a NOP if there is no implementation benefit.

### B1.3.4 Application level cache management

$\triangle$ A small number of cache management instructions can be enabled at EL0 from higher levels of privilege using the SCTLR_EL1 System register. Any access from EL0 to an operation with the access right disabled cause instruction to behave as UNDEFINED.

### B1.3.5 Instructions relating to Debug

$\triangle$ Exception handling refers `BRK` instruction, which generates a Breakpoint Instruction exception. In addition, in both AArch64 state and AArch32 state, the `HLT` instruction causes the PE to halt execution and enter Debug state. This provides a mechanism for debugging software using a debugger that is external to the PE.

$\triangle$ In AArch32 state, previous version of the architecture defined the `DBG` instruction, which could provide a hint to the debug system. This instruction executes as a `NOP`. Arm deprecates the use of the `DBG` instruction.

### B1.3.6 About PSTATE.DIT

$\triangle$ When the value of PSTATE.DIT is 1:

- The instructions listed in DIT are required to have;
  - Timing which is independent of the values of the data supplied in any of its registers, and the values of the NZCV flags.
  - Responses to asynchronous exceptions which do not vary based on the values supplied in any of their registers, or the values of the NZCV flags.
- All loads and stores must have their timing insensitive to the value of the data being loaded or stored.

$\triangle$ 
- The use of value prediction for load data values when PSTATE.DIT is set, is not compatible with the requirement that the timing is insensitive to the data value being loaded.
- Arm recommends that the FEAT_PAuth instructions do not have their timing dependent on the key value used in the pointer authentication, regardless of the PSTATE.DIT bit.
- When the value of PSTATE.DIT is 0, the architecture makes no statement about the timing properties of any instructions. However, it is likely that these instructions have timing that is invariant of the data in many situations.
- If SVE2 is not implemented, the data independent timing control introduced by FEAT_DIT does not affect the timing properties of SVE instructions.
- *The Operational information* section of an SVE or an SVE2 instruction description indicates whether or not that instruction honors the PSTATE.DIT control. If the *Operational information* section of an SVE instruction description does not mention PSTATE.DIT or if the section does not exist, then the instruction timing is not affected by PSTATE.DIT.
- For SVE and SVE2 predicated instructions, it is the programmer’s responsibility to use a *Governing predicate* that does not reflect the values of the data being operated on.

$\triangle$ A corresponding DIT bit is added to PSTATE in AArch64 state, and to CPSR in AArch32 state.

$\triangle$ On an exception that is taken from AArch64 state to AArch64 state, PSTATE.DIT is copied to SPSR_ELx.DIT.

$\triangle$ On an exception that is taken from AArch32 state to AArch64 state, CPSR.DIT is copied to SPSR_ELx.DIT.

$\triangle$ On an exception return from AArch64 state:

- SPSR_ELx.DIT is copied to PSTATE.DIT, when the target Exception level is in AArch64 state.
- SPSR_ELx.DIT is copied to CPSR.DIT, when the target Exception level is in AArch32 state.

$\triangle$ PSTATE.DIT can be written and read at all Exception levels.

$\triangle$ 

- PSTATE.DIT is unchanged on entry into Debug state.
- PSTATE.DIT is not guaranteed to have any effect in Debug state.

## B1.4 SVE predicated instructions

$\triangle$ If an instruction supports predication, it is known as a predicated instruction.

$\triangle$ The predicated operand that is used to determine the *Active elements* of a predicated instruction is known as the *Governing predicate*.

$\triangle$ An instruction that does not have a *Governing predicate* operand and implicitly treats all other vector and predicate elements as Active is known as an unpredicated instruction.

$\triangle$ Many predicated instructions can only use P0-P7 as the *Governing predicate*.

$\triangle$ When a *Governing predicate* element is TRUE, the corresponding element in other vector or predicate operands is an *Active element*.

$\triangle$ When a *Governing predicate* element is FALSE, the corresponding element in other vector or predicate operands is an *Inactive element*.

$\triangle$ Predicated instructions process *Active elements*.

$\triangle$ Predicated instructions do not process *Inactive elements*.

$\triangle$ Unpredicated instructions process all elements in their vector or predicate operands.

$\triangle$ When a predicated instruction writes to a vector destination register or a predicate destination register, one of the following happens:
- The *Inactive elements* in the destination register are set to zero.
- The *Inactive elements* in the destination register retain their previous value.

$\triangle$ zero predication is performed when the *Inactive elements* in the destination register are set to zero.

$\triangle$ Merging predication is performed when *Inactive elements* in the destination register retain their previous value.
