# Chapter C1 The A64 Instruction Set

## C1.1 About the A64 instruction set

$\triangle$ The A64 instruction set is the instruction set supported in the AArch64 Execute state.

$\triangle$ All A64 instructions have a width of 32 bits. The A64 encoding structure breaks down into the following functional groups:

- A miscellaneous group of branch instructions, exception generating instructions, and System instructions.
- Data-processing instruction associated with general-purpose registers. These instructions are supported by two *function groups*, depending on whether the operands:
  - Area all held in registers.
  - Include an operand with constant immediate value.
- Load and store instructions associated with the general-purpose register file, the SIMD and floating-point register file, and the SVE register file.
- SIMD and scalar floating-point data-processing instructions that operate on the SIMD and floating-point registers.
- SVE data-processing instructions that operate on the SVE registers.

$\triangle$ The encoding hierarchy within a functional group breaks down as follows:

- A functional group consists of a set of related instruction classes.
- An instruction class consists of a set of related instruction forms.
- An instruction form might support a single instruction syntax. Where an instruction supports more than on syntax, each syntax is an *instruction variant*. Instruction variants can occur because of differences in:
  - The size or format of the operands.
  - The register file used for the operands.
  - The addressing mode used for load/store memory operands.

$\triangle$ A64 instructions have a regular bit encoding structure:

- 5-bit register operand fields at fixed positions within the instruction. For general-purpose register operands, the values 0-30 select one of 31 registers. The value 31 is used as a special case that can:
  - Indicate use of the current stack pointer, when identifying a load/store base register or in a limited set of data-processing instructions.
  - Indicate the value zero when used as a source register operand.
  - Indicate discarding the result when used as a destination register operand.
  
  For SIMD and floating-point register access and SVE register access, the value used selects one of 32 registers.

- Immediate bits that provide constant data-processing values or address offsets are placed in contiguous bitfields. Some computed values in instruction variants use one or more immediate bitfields together with the secondary encoding bitfields.

$\triangle$ All encodings that are not fully defined are described as unallocated. An attempt to execute an unallocated instruction is UNDEFINED, unless the behavior is otherwise defined in this Manual.

## C1.2 Structure of the A64 assembler language

### C1.2.1 General requirements

$\triangle$ The letter `W` denotes a general-purpose register holding a 32-bit word, and `X` denotes a general-purpose register holding a 64-bit doubleword.

$\triangle$ An A64 assembler recognizes both uppercase and lowercase variants of the instruction mnemonics and register names, but not mixed case variants. An A64 disassembler can output either uppercase or lowercase mnemonics and register names. Program and data labels are case-sensitive.

$\triangle$  The A64 assembly language does not require the # character to introduce constant immediate operands, but an assembler must allow immediate values introduces with or without the # character.

### C1.2.2 Common syntax terms

### C1.2.3 Instruction Mnemonics

$\triangle$ The A64 assembly language overloads instruction mnemonics and distinguishes between the different forms of an instruction based on the operand types. However, the programmer must remember only one mnemonic, as the assembler automatically chooses the correct opcode based on the operands. The disassembler follows the same procedure in reverse.

###### Example C1-1 ADD instructions with different opcodes

### C1.2.4 Condition code

$\triangle$ The A64 ISA has some instructions that set Condition flags or test Condition codes or both.

###### Table C1-1 Condition codes

### C1.2.5 SVE Condition code aliases

$\triangle$ The SVE assembler syntax defines an alternative set of SVE condition code aliases for use with AArch64 conditional instruction.

###### Table C1-2 SVE Condition codes

### C1.2.6 Register names

#### General-purpose register file and zero register and stack pointer

$\triangle$ The 31 general-purpose registers in the general-purpose register file are named R0-R30 and encoded in the instruction register fields with values 0-30. In a general-purpose register field the value 31 represents either the current stack pointer or the zero register, depending on the instruction and the operand position.

$\triangle$ When the registers are used in a specific instruction variant, they must be qualified to indicate the operand data size, 32 bits or 64 bits, and the data size of the instruction.

$\triangle$ When the data size is 32 bits, the power 32 bits of the register are used and the upper 32 bits are ignored on a read and cleared to zero on a write.

###### Table C1-3 Naming of general-purpose registers, the zero register, and the stack point

$\triangle$ This list give more information about the instruction arguments:
- The name Xn and Wn both refer to the same general-purpose register, Rn.
- There is no register named W31 or X31
- The name SP represents the stack pointer for 64-bit operands where an encoding of the value 31 in the corresponding register field is interpreted as a read or write of the current stack pointer. When instructions do not interpret this operand encoding as the stack pointer, use of the name SP is an error.
- The name WSP represents the current stack pointer in a 32-bit context.
- The name XZR represents the zero register for 64-bit operands where an encoding of the value 31 in the corresponding register field is interpreted as returning zero when read or discarding the result when written. When instructions do not interpret this operand encoding as the zero register, use of the name XZR is an error.
- The name WZR represents the zero register in a 32-bit context.
- The architecture does not define a specific name for general-purpose register R30 to reflect is role as the link register on procedure calls. However, an A64 assembler must always use W30 and X30 for this purpose.

#### SIMD and floating-point register file

$\triangle$ The 32 registers in the SIMD and floating-point register file, V0-V31, hold floating-point operands for the scalar floating-point instructions, and both scalar and vector operands for the SIMD instructions. When they are used in a specific instruction form, the names must be further qualified to indicate the data shape, that is the data element size and the number of elements or lanes within the register. A similar requirement is placed on the general-purpose register.

$\triangle$ The data type is described by the instruction mnemonics that operate on the dta. The data type is not described by the register name. The data type is the interpretation of bits within each register or vector element, whether these are integers, floating-point values, polynomials, or cryptographic hashes.

#### SIMD and floating-point scalar register names

$\triangle$ SIMD and floating-point instructions that operate on scalar data only access the power bits of a SIMD and floating-point register. The unused high bits are ignored on a read and cleared to 0 on a write.

###### Table C1-4 SIMD and floating-point scalar register names

#### SIMD vector register names

$\triangle$ If a register holds multiple data elements on which arithmetic is performed in a parallel, SIMD, manner, than a qualifier describes the vector shape. The vector shape is the element size and the number of elements or lanes. If the element size in bits multiplied by the number of lanes does not equal 128, then the upper 64 bits of the register are ignored on a read and cleared to zero on a write.

###### Table C1-5 SIMD vector register names

#### SIMD vector element names

$\triangle$ Appending a constant, zero-based element index to the register name inside square brackets indicates that a single element from a SIMD and floating-point register is used as a scalar operand. The number of lanes is not represented, as it is not encoded in the instruction can can only be inferred from the index value.

###### Table C1-6 Vector register names with element index

$\triangle$ An assembler must accept a fully qualified SIMD register name if the number of lanes is greater than the index value.

$\triangle$ The SIMD and floating-pont register element name `Vn.S[0]` is not equivalent to the scalar SIMD and floating-point register name `Sn`. Although they represent the same bits in the register, they select different instruction encoding forms, either the vector element or the scalar form.

##### SIMD vector register list

$\triangle$ Where an instruction operates on multiple SIMD and floating-point registers, for example vector load/store structure and table lookup operations, the registers are specified as a list enclosed by curly braces. This list consists of either a sequence of registers separated by commas, or a register range separated by a hyphen. The registers must be numbered in increasing order, modulo 32, in increments of one. The hyphenated form is preferred for disassembly if there are more than two registers in the list and the register number are increasing. 

##### SIMD vector element list

$\triangle$ Registers in a list can also have a vector element form.

## C1.3 Address generation

$\triangle$ The A64 instruction set supports 64-bit virtual addresses (VAs). The valid VA range is determined by the following factors:
- The size of the implemented virtual address space.
- *Memory Management Unit* (MMU) configuration settings.

$\triangle$ Limits on the VA size mean that the most significant bits of the virtual address do not hold valid address bits. These unused bits can hold:
- A tag.
- If FEAT_PAuth is implemented, a Pointer authentication code (PAC).

### C1.3.1 Register indexed addressing

$\triangle$ The A64 instruction set allows a 64-bit index register to be added to the 64-bit base register, with optional scaling of the index by the access size. Additionally it allows for sign-extension or zero-extension of a 32-bit value within an index register, followed by optional scaling.

### C1.3.2 PC-relative addressing

$\triangle$ The A64 instruction set has support for position-independent code and data addressing:
- PC-relative literal loads have an offset range of $\pm$ 1MB.
- Process state flag and compare based conditional branches have a range of $\pm$ 1MB. Test bit conditional branches have a restricted range of $\pm$ 32KB.
- Unconditional branches, including branch and link, have a range of $\pm$ 128MB.

$\triangle$ PC-relative load/store operations, and address generation with a range of $\pm$ 4GB can be performed using two instructions.

### C1.3.3 Load/store addressing modes

$\triangle$ Load/store addressing modes in the A64 instruction set require a 64-bit base address from a general-purpose register X0-X30 or the current stack pointer, `SP`, with an optional immediate or register offset.

###### Table C1-7 A64 Load/store addressing modes

$\triangle$ Some types of load/store instruction support only a subset of the load/store addressing modes.

$\triangle$ Base plus offset addressing means that the address is the value in the 64-bit base register plus an offset.

$\triangle$ Pre-indexed addressing means that the address is the sum of the value in the 64-bit base register and an offset, and the address is then written back to the base register.

$\triangle$ Post-indexed addressing means that the address is the value in the 64-bit base register, and the sum of the address and the offset is then written back to the base register.

$\triangle$ Literal addressing means that the address is the value of the 64-bit program counter for this instruction plus a 19-bit signed word offset. This means that it is a 4 byte aligned address within $\pm$ 1MB of the address of this instruction with no offset. Literal addressing can be used only for loads of at least 32 bits and for prefetch instructions. The PC cannot be referenced using any other addressing modes. The syntax for labels is specific to individual toolchains. 

$\triangle$ An immediate offset can be unsigned or signed, and scaled or unscaled, depending on the type of load/store instruction. When the immediate offset is scaled it is encoded as a multiple of the transfer size, although the assembly language always uses a byte offset, and the assembler or disassembler performs the necessary conversion. The usable byte offsets therefore depend on the type of load/store instruction and the transfer size.

###### Table C1-8 Immediate offsets and the type of load/store instruction

$\triangle$ A register offset means that the offset is the 64 bits from a general-purpose register, Xm, optionally scaled by the transfer size, in bytes, if `LSL #imm` is present and where `imm` must be equal to log~2~(transfer_size). The `SXTX` extend/shift option is functionally equivalent to `LSL`, but the `LSL` option is preferred in source code.

$\triangle$ An extended register offset means that offset is the bottom 32 bits from a general-purpose register Wm, sign-extended or zero-extended to 64 bits, and then scaled by the transfer size if so indicated by `#imm`， where imm must be equal to log~2~(transfer_size). An assembler must accept Vm or Xm as an extended register offset, but Wm is preferred for disassembly.

$\triangle$ Generating an address lower than the value in the base register requires a negative signed immediate offset or a register offset holding a negative value.

$\triangle$ When stack alignment checking is enabled by system software and the base register is the SP, the current stack pointer must be initially quadword aligned, that is aligned to 16 bytes. Misalignment generates a Stack Alignment fault. The offset does not have to be a multiple of 16 bytes unless the specific load/store instruction requires this. SP cannot be used as a register offset.

#### Address calculation

$\triangle$ General-purpose arithmetic instructions can calculate the result of most addressing modes and write the address to a general-purpose register or, in most cases, to the current stack pointer.

$\triangle$ For the 64-bit base plus register offset form, the `UXTX` mnemonic is an alias for the `LSL` shift option, but `LSL` is preferred for disassembly. Similarly the `SXTX` extend/shift option is functionally equivalent to the `LSL` option, but the `LSL` option is preferred in source code.

$\triangle$ To calculate a base plus immediate offset the `ADD` instructions accept an unsigned 12-bit immediate offset, with an optional left shift by 12. This means that a single `ADD` instruction cannot support the full range of byte offsets available to a single register load/store with a scaled 12-bit immediate offset.

$\triangle$ To calculate a base plus extended register offset, the `ADD` instructions provide a superset of the addressing mode that also supports sign-extension or zero-extension of a byte or halfword value with any shift amount between 0 and 4.

$\triangle$ If the same extended register offset is used by more than one load/store instruction, then, depending on the implementation, it might be more efficient to calculate the extended and scaled intermediate result just once, and then reuse it as a simple register offset. The extend and scale calculation can be performed using the `SBFIZ` and `UBFIZ` bitfield instructions.

###### Table C1-9 Arithmetic instructions to compute addressing modes

## C1.4 Instruction aliases

$\triangle$ Some instructions have an associated *architecture alias* that is used for disassembly of the encoding when the associated conditions are met. 