# Chapter C2 About the A64 Instruction Descriptions

## C2.1 Understanding the A64 instruction descriptions

$\triangle$ Each instruction has the following content:
- A title
- An introduction to the instruction.
- The instruction encoding or encodings.
- Any alias conditions.
- A list of the assembler symbols for the instruction.
- Pseudocode describing how the instruction operates.
- Notes, if applicable.

### C2.1.1 The title

$\triangle$ The title of an instruction description includes the base mnemonic for the instruction.

$\triangle$ If different forms of an instruction use the same base mnemonic, each form has its own description. In this case, the title is the mnemonic followed by a short description of the instruction form in parentheses. This is most often used when an operand is an immediate value in one instruction form, but is a register in another form.

### C2.1.2 An instruction to the instruction

$\triangle$ This briefly describes the function of the instruction. The introduction is not a complete description of the instruction, and it is not definitive. If there is any conflict between it and the more detailed information that follows it, the more detailed information takes priority.

### C2.1.3 The instruction encoding or encodings

$\triangle$ This shows the instruction encoding diagram, or if the instruction has more than one encoding, shows all of the encoding diagrams. Each diagram has a subheading.

$\triangle$ There might be variants of an encoding, if the *assembler syntax prototype* differs depending on the value in one or more of the encoding fields. In this case, each variant has a subheading that describes the variant and shows the distinguishing field value or values in parentheses. 

$\triangle$ The assembler syntax prototype for an encoding or variant of an encoding shows how to form a complete assembler source code instruction that assembles to the encoding. Unless otherwise stated, the prototype is also the preferred syntax for a disassembler to disassemble the encoding to. Disassemblers are permitted to omit optional symbols that represent the default value of a field or set of fields, to produce more readable disassembled code, provided that the output re-assembles to the same encoding.

$\triangle$ Each encoding diagram, and its associated assembler syntax prototypes, is followed by encoding-specific pseudocode that translates the fields or that encoding into inputs for the encoding-independent pseudocode that describes the operation of the instruction.

### C2.1.4 Any alias conditions, if applicable

$\triangle$ This is an optional part of an instruction description. If included, it describes the set of conditions for which an alternative mnemonic and its associated assembler syntax prototypes are preferred for disassembly by a disassembler. It includes a link to the alias instruction description that defines the alternative syntax. The alias syntax and the original syntax can be used interchangeably in the assembler source code.

$\triangle$ Arm recommends that if a disassembler outputs the alias syntax, it consistently outputs the alias syntax.

### C2.1.5 A list of the assembler symbols for the instruction

$\triangle$ The *Assembler symbols* subsection of the instruction description contains a list of the symbols that the assembler syntax prototype or prototypes use, if any.

$\triangle$ In assembler syntax prototypes, the following conventions are used:
- `<>` Angle brackets. Any symbol enclosed by these is a name or a value that the user supplies. For each symbol, there is a description of what the symbol represents. The description usually also specifies which encoding field or fields encodes the symbol.
- `{}` Brace brackets. Any symbols enclosed by these are optional. For each optional symbol, there is a description of what the symbol represents and how its presence or absence is encoded.

  In some assembler syntax prototypes, some brace brackets are mandatory, for example if they surround a register list. When the use of brace brackets is mandatory, they are separated from other syntax items by one or more spaces.
- `#` This usually precedes a numeric constant. All uses of `#` are optional in A64 assembler source code. Arm recommends that disassemblers output the `#` when the assembler syntax prototype includes it.
- `+/-` This indicates an optional + or - sign. If neither is coded, + is assumed.

$\triangle$ Single spaces are used for clarity, to separate syntax items. Where a space is mandatory, the assembler syntax prototype shows two or more consecutive spaces.

$\triangle$ Any characters not shown in this conventions list must be coded exactly as shown in the assembler syntax prototype. Apart from brace brackets, the characters shown are used as part of a meta-language to define the architectural assembler syntax for an instruction encoding or alias, but have no architecturally defined significance in the input to an assembler or in the output from a disassembler.

$\triangle$ The following symbol conventions are used:
- `<Xn>` The 64-bit name of a general-purpose register (X0-X30) or the zero register (XZR).
- `<Wn>` The 32-bit name of a general-purpose register (W0-W30) or the zero register (WZR).
- `<Xn|SP>` The 64-bit name of a general-purpose register (X0-X30) or the current stack pointer (SP).
- `<Wn|WSP>` The 32-bit name of a general-purpose register (W0-W30) or the current stack pointer (WSP).
- `<Bn>`, `<Hn>`, `<Sn>`, `<Dn>`, `<Qn>` The 8, 16, 32, 64, or 128-bit name of a SIMD and floating-point register in a scalar context.
- `<Vn>` The name of a SIMD and floating-point register in a vector context.
- `<Zn>` The name of an SVE vector register.
- `<Pn>` The name of an SVE predicate register.

$\triangle$ If the description of a symbol specifies that the symbol is a register, the description might also specify that the range of permitted registers is extended or restricted. It also specifies any differences from the default rules for such fields.

### C2.1.6 Pseudocode describing how the instruction operates
$\triangle$ The *Operation* subsection of the instruction description contains this pseudocode.

$\triangle$ It is encoding-independent pseudocode that provides a precise description of what the instruction does.

### C2.1.7 Notes, if applicable
$\triangle$ If applicable, other notes about the instruction appear under additional subheadings.

## C2.2 General information about the A64 instruction descriptions

### C2.2.1 Execution of instructions in debug state

$\triangle$ In general, except for the instructions described in *Debug state*, the A64 instruction descriptions do not indicate any differences in the behavior of the instruction if it is executed in Debug state.

### C2.2.2 Fixed values in AArch64 instruction and System register descriptions

$\triangle$ This section summarizes the terms used to describe fixed values in AArch64 register and instruction description. The Glossary gives full descriptions of these terms, and each entry in this section includes a link to the corresponding Glossary entry.

$\triangle$ In register descriptions, the meaning of some bits depends on the PE state. This affects the definitions of RES0 and RES1.

$\triangle$ **RAZ**. Read-As-Zero. In diagrams, a RAZ bit can be shown as 0.

$\triangle$ **(0), RES0**. Reserved, Should-Be-Zero (SBZ) or RES0.

$\triangle$ In instruction encoding diagrams, and sometimes in other descriptions, `(0)` indicates an SBZ bit. If the bit is set to 1, behavior is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and must be one of the following:
- The instruction is UNDEFINED.
- The instruction is treated as a `NOP`.
- The instruction executes as if the value of the bit was 0.
- Any destination registers of the instruction become UNKNOWN.

$\triangle$ This notation can be expanded for fields, so a three-bit field can be shown as either `(0)(0)(0)` or as `(000)`.

$\triangle$ In register diagrams, but not in the A64 encoding and instruction descriptions, bits or fields can be shown as RES0.

$\triangle$ Some of the System instruction descriptions in this chapter are based on the *field description* of the input value for the instruction. These are register descriptions and therefore can include RES0 fields.

$\triangle$ The `(0)` and RES0 descriptions can be applied to bits or bit fields that are read-only, or are write-only.

$\triangle$ **RAO**. Read-As-One. In a diagrams, a RAO bit can be shown as 1.

$\triangle$ **(1), RES1**. Reserved, Should-Be-One (SBO) or RES1.

$\triangle$ In instruction encoding diagrams, and sometimes in other descriptions, `(1)` indicates an SBO bit. If the bit is set to 0, behavior is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and must be one of the following:
- The instruction is UNDEFINED.
- The instruction is treated as a `NOP`.
- The instruction executes as if the value of the bit was 1.
- Any destination registers of the instruction become UNKNOWN.

$\triangle$ This notation can be expanded for fields, so a three-bit field can be shown as either `(1)(1)(1)` or as `(111)`.

$\triangle$ In register diagrams, but not in the A64 encoding and instruction descriptions, bits or fields can be shown as RES1. See the Glossary definition of RES1 for more information.

$\triangle$ Some of the System instruction descriptions in this chapter are based on the field description of the input value for the instruction. These are register descriptions and therefore can include RES1 fields.

$\triangle$ The `(1)` and RES1 descriptions can be applied to bits or bit fields that are read-only, or are write-only.

### C2.2.3 Modified immediate constants in A64 instructions

#### Modified immediate constant in A64 floating-point instructions

$\triangle$ The bit pattern represents the floating point number $(-1)^\text{S}\times 2^{\text{exp}} \times \text{mantissa}$, where S=`UInt(a)`, exp=`UInt(Not(b):c:d)-3` and mantissa=`(16+UInt(e:f:g:h))/16`.

###### Table C2-1 A64 Floating-point modified immediate constants

###### Table C2-2 Floating-point constant values

